Think of the leaders in your organisation.  What challenges are they facing?  How are their views of leadership changing? 


The continuous evolving business environment has impacted our professional and personal lives.  In these times, leadership matters even more. We begin our examination of leadership by first gaining a better understanding of what leadership is and means.  

Despite the thousands of books and articles about leadership, it is complicated to find a definition that can capture the essence of leadership.  In fact, there is an astounding variety of opinions and views on leadership. Most of the literature describes leadership in terms such as traits, skills, and outcomes and explains what leadership is and what leadership is for.  

 
DeHaan (2016) notes if we look at the most prevalent definitions in the literature and in practice, there are three core ways leadership is described:

Leadership - influencing others to willingly do what you want them to do, i.e. leading means gaining or using power over others.
Leadership - a certain form of excellence - usually consists of a list of attributes like honesty, inspiration, confidence, commitment, humour, intuition, and humility.
Leadership - whoever is the person who occupies the leadership role, i.e. everybody is suitable to be a leader vs indeed nobody.

Four Dimensions of Leadership
As long as there have been leaders, there have been those who have studied leadership.  Most leadership studies have focused on the individual leader traits, transformational and transactional leadership forms, leadership behaviour and styles, the role of diversity in top management, and the psychodynamic dimensions that drive leaders.  However, some experts argue leadership studies should pay greater attention to how leadership emerges and evolves in social and organisational settings.  

In this article, Denis and his colleagues (2010) examined three case studies in various health care organisations to see how a leader's role is in constant flux, emerging, shifting, and changing.  The researchers summarised the ‘doing’ elements of leadership in terms of three sets of consequences involving: 

Substantive - concrete systems and imposed structural change
Symbolic - influence of meanings/interpretations amongst various stakeholders
Political -  where, for example, increased/decreased credibility may lead to changes in the leader's formal position and the future scope of their leadership
Dennis et al. (2010) recommend leaders need to understand that leadership is not just an individual ownership attribute they can apply to any situation but rather is the result of a coalition of activities and interpersonal relations taking place throughout an organisation.  They identified four features of the practice of leadership:

Leadership as Dynamic: Leadership actions at one time can change the potential for effective leadership later.
Leadership as Collective: Leadership depends critically on a constellation of co-leaders who play complementary roles.
Leadership as Situated: Leadership is manifest in the micro-activities of leaders in interactions with others in specific contexts.
Leadership as Dialectic: Practices that seem to be effective often have a downside.  The strength of leaders can become weaknesses.

-----

1.2. Complexity Leadership in the Knowledge Era
Twenty years ago, businesses were operating in a fairly stable world where change occurred at a much slower pace.  During that time, autocratic leadership was very common and practised by many organisational leaders. Managers had full control and gave employees clear directions on what to do, when to do it, and how to do it with very little input from employees.

Fast forward to today, businesses operate in complex, competitive landscapes driven by globalisation and the technological revolution. Knowledge has become a core commodity, and the rapid production of knowledge and innovation is vital for organisational survival. This Knowledge Era has meant a shift from the autocratic leadership style of the twentieth century to a leadership style that supports an increase of organisational complexity.  In other words, leadership in the Knowledge Era requires a change in thinking from individual and controlling views towards a view that organisations are complex, adaptive systems that enable continuous knowledge development, adaptability, and innovation.  


What experiences have you had with autocratic leadership?  Why does today's global and technological environment require leaders to use a different approach?

Complexity Leadership Theory
Over the last two decades, a range of leadership theories has been designed to understand better the behaviours that drive organisational effectiveness.  Let's examine one such theory, the Complexity Leadership Theory (CLT).  Complexity leadership theory recognizes the dynamic interactions of organisations as they change, evolve and create innovation. It suggests leadership needs to operate at all levels in a process-oriented, contextual, and interactive fashion (Uhl-Bien & McKelvey, 2007).


How Does Complexity Leadership Work?
Complexity leadership theory recognizes the dynamic interactions that take place in an organisation as it changes and innovates.  The theory focuses on the many and constant social interactions within a network.  Thus, anyone within a workplace can become a leader and influence the dynamics enabling innovation.  For example, a study by Hanson and Ford (2010) found the core leaders in a hospital laboratory setting were actually the front-line workers - the customer service representatives. These customers service core leaders played an important role in conducting information flow to all others in the lab and heavily influenced other lab sections. 

-----

1.3. Leadership and Change
Organisations are not static entities - they often change.  With increased globalization, climate change, technological innovation, shifting social and demographic trends, new ideologies, and increased legislation, continuous change has almost become normal.  Yet, change is an opportunity to think of new ways of organizing and working.  

The Traditional vs New View Approach to Change
The classical organisation development view on change is built on the work of Lewin (1958) and Schein (1988) and considers change as linear and a series of planned processes and episodic events.  This traditional approach also views the role of the change agent as a single perspective of events.  However, experts have argued that organisations are complex and change is continuous and ongoing.  Some experts have also suggested the idea of multiple realities and positions and that people seek to construct a narrative that brings meanings to events - or sensemaking. This debate between the traditional episodic approach to change management and the new dynamic and continuous approach has prompted researchers to determine what change leaders actually do.  

Emerging Change Model
In Lawrence's (2015) study of change leaders, he finds that many leaders are intuitively aware of the limitations of traditional approaches to change and are likely to not rely on traditional change models.  

-----

Storytelling
What makes speeches like Martin Luther King Jr's dream of ending racial segregation or Winston Churchill's call for courage in the face of war so motivational?  Storytelling.  Storytelling is a powerful and effective way a leader can articulate their vision and motivate others to use their native talents, creativity, and insights to make a shared vision a reality

The Power of a Story
A story is crafted using three elements: plot, character, and moral.  The story's effect depends on the setting: who tells the story, who listens, where they are, why they are there, and when.

Plot - A story's plot engages us, captures our interest, and makes us pay attention. Why do we care?  According to Ganz (2010), dealing with the unexpected is part of our lives, such as a marriage break-up or losing your job.  As human beings, we are capable of agency or making choices based on remembering the past and imagining the future.  When we follow a routine or habit, we are not making choices.  Only when guidelines are unclear or when our routines breakdown, do we really make choices and become the creators of our own lives, communities, and futures.  It is at these moments we become agents of our own fate.  
Character - Stories persuade through an empathetic identification with the protagonist.  Have you ever listened to a story where you could not identify with a single character? It's boring. Thus, we may identify with a protagonist if they are only vaguely like us or at other time, we identify with those who are very much like us. 
Moral - The moral of a successful story is emotionally experienced understanding. Thus, stories can teach us how to manage our emotions, not repress them, so we can act with agency to face our challenges.  Stories are told to make a point and evoke a response.
Storytelling is fundamentally relational.  As we listen to a story, we evaluate it.  If it is the storyteller's story, we will hear it one way.  If it is a story of a friend, colleague, or family member, we hear it another way.  Storytelling is how we interact with each other about values, share our experiences, counsel each other, comfort each other, and inspire each other to action. 

Stories can also have a powerful and inspiring effect on an organisation.  Leaders use stories to motivate, inspire, reduce conflict, build trust, influence superiors, and establish a clear direction.  Storytelling can also help leaders be more strategic and guide an organisation through difficult changes by using stories to change the way people think and offer comfort and hope.  

Relational Leadership, Storytelling, and Narratives
In this article, Orr and Bennett (2016) examine the storytelling and narrative practices of an elite group of public administrators in the United Kingdom. They identified the following four ways leadership is accomplished: 

Inviting an emotional connection with public service - Storytelling allowed chief executives to propose a recasting of relationship with the public and a realigned different parts of the organisation.

Making sense of organizational realities - Chief executives used storytelling to interpret a changing environment, raise awareness of others' expectations, and mobilise action.

Provoking reflections on practices and assumptions - Stores were used to critique and generate change while anticipating a sceptical audience.

Managing political relations with council leaders - Uses political storytelling to manage interactions and ensure the collective is not vulnerable to a lack of political discipline. 

The Organizational Story as Leadership
Organisational stories reflect detailed narratives that, in relation to leadership conceptions and practice, in effect prescribe, rather than simply describe, perceptions and actions. The term ‘discourse’ is used, to reveal the power of such storytelling, to influence mindsets and behaviours culturally. In this regard, organisations, in drawing on narratives which publicise their strategies, visions, etc, are attempting to create positive tales/legacies. Hence, the types of sense-making processes we are exposed to are not necessarily neutral.

This is readily apparent in the article by Khan et al (2021), which reveals how the media ‘socially constructs’ powerful images in relation to “who” can be represented as a leader. The research explores the implications of how the media portrays the ‘typical’ leader, in terms of the underlying gendered assumptions that continue, despite broader social changes in this area. In particular, the authors show how aspects of ‘so-called’ feminine modes of communication have become incorporated into the typical hyper-masculine set of images (softening the persona) rather than reframing them.

The important point of the research is to demonstrate the power of the media to influence our sensemaking processes, and associated behavioural expectations, through both the printed word and visual imagery. Be sure to spend a few moments reflecting on the media image posted on page 10 relating to the visual representation. What story does this magazine cover tell you?

Leadership Practices 
Parry and Hansen (2007) suggest five leadership practices based on organisational stories.

Be aware that some organisation stories are positive and supportive while other stories are negative and damaging.
Create a desirable 'moral' to negatives stories to refuel or relaunch a more positive story.  The alternative moral should facilitate sensemaking in the minds of followers.
Recognize that every action by a leader can become a story and retold by others. Therefore, ensure the story of your leadership role is a positive one or at least be the story you wish to be told. 
Build stories into your discourse and be representative of the collective organisation.
Downplay your personal leadership role and have faith in the story that has been released to the organisation.

-----


